# 1.2 Limitation of Physical Measurements

[[Random Error|Random errors]] affect [[Precision|precision]], meaning they cause differences in measurements which causes a spread about the mean. You **cannot** get rid of all random errors.

To reduce them:
- Take atleast 3 repeats, and calculate a mean (Also helps to identify anomalies)
- Use Computers/data loggers/cameras to reduce random error and enable smaller intervals, making [[Uncertainty]] smaller too.
- Use appropriate equipment , e.g. a micrometer has [[Resolution|resolution]] of 0.1mm while a ruler is 1mm

---
[[Systematic Error|Systematic errors]] affect [[Accuracy|accuracy]] and occur due to the apparatus or faults in the experimental method. 

Examples are if a balance isn't zeroed properly (zero error) or reading the scale at a different angle (parallax error)

To reduce them:
- Calibrate apparatus by measuring a known value. If it is innacurate you can quickly identify the error
- In radiation eperiments correct for background radiation by measuring it beforehand and excluding it from final results.
- Read from eye level 

---
The uncertainty in a [[Reading]] is ± half the smallest division.
##### example:
the smallest divisioin on a thermometer is 1°C so the uncertainty is ±0.5°C

The uncertainty in a [[Measurement]] is ±1 smallest division
##### example:
A ruler must include both the uncertai nty for the start and end value, as each end has ±0.5mm, the added uncertainty is ±1mm.

For **Digital readings**, The uncertainty is assumed to be ± the last significant figure.
##### example:
3.2 ±0.1V

For **Repeated data**, uncertainty is half the range. Show as :
$$mean ± \frac{range}{2}$$

---
## Combining uncertainties

### Adding/subtracting data
Add [[Absolute uncertainty|Absolute uncertainties]]

### Multiplying/dividing data
Add [[Percentage uncertainty|Percentage uncertainties]]